Causes
People react differently to stressful situations. What is stressful for one person may not be stressful for another, and almost any event can potentially cause stress. For some people, just thinking about a trigger or several smaller triggers can cause stress.
There is no identifiable reason why one person may feel less stressed than another when facing the same stressor. Mental Health conditions, such as depression, or a building sense of frustration, injustice, and anxiety can make some people feel stressed more easily than others.
Previous experiences may affect how a person reacts to stressors.
Common major life events that can trigger stress include:
job issues or retirement
lack of time or money
bereavement
family problems
illness
moving home
relationships, marriage, and divorce
Other commonly reported causes of stress are:
abortion or pregnancy loss
driving in heavy traffic or fear of an accident
fear of crime or problems with neighbors
pregnancy and becoming a parent
excessive noise, overcrowding, and pollution
uncertainty or waiting for an important outcome
Some people experience ongoing stress after a traumatic event, such as an accident or some kind of abuse. Doctors will diagnose this as PTSD.
Those who work in stressful jobs, such as the military or the emergency services, will have a debriefing session following a major incident, and occupational healthcare services will monitor them for PTSD.
Symptoms and complications
The physical effects of stress can include:
sweating
pain in the back or chest
cramps or muscle spasms
fainting
headaches
nervous twitches
pins and needles sensations
A 2012 study found that the stressors that parents experience, such as financial troubles or managing a single-parent household, may also lead to obesity in their children.
Emotional reactions can include:
anger
burnout
concentration issues
fatigue
a feeling of insecurity
forgetfulness
irritability
nail biting
restlessness
sadness
Stress-associated behaviors include:
food cravings and eating too much or too little
sudden angry outbursts
drug and alcohol misuse
higher tobacco consumption
social withdrawal
frequent crying
relationship problems
If stress becomes chronic, it can lead to several complications, including
anxiety
depression
heart disease
high blood pressure
lower immunity against diseases
muscular aches
PTSD
sleeping difficulties
stomach upset
erectile dysfunction (impotence) and loss of libido
