Diagnosis
If a person suspects that they have symptoms of depression, they should seek professional help from a doctor or mental health specialist.
A qualified health professional can rule out various causes, ensure an accurate diagnosis, and provide safe and effective treatment.
They will ask questions about symptoms, such as how long they have been present. A doctor may also conduct an examination to check for physical causes and order a blood test to rule out other health conditions.
Tests
Mental health professionals often ask people to complete questionnaires to help assess the severity of their depression.
The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, for example, has 21 questions. The scores indicate the severity of depression among people who already have a diagnosis.
The Beck Depression Inventory is another questionnaire that helps mental health professionals measure a person’s symptoms.
Treatment
Psychotherapy may help a person manage their symptoms of depression.
Depression is treatable, and managing symptoms usually involves three components:
Support: This can range from discussing practical solutions and possible causes to educating family members.
Psychotherapy: Also known as talking therapy, some options include one-to-one counseling and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
Drug treatment: A doctor may prescribe antidepressants.
Medication
Antidepressants can help treat moderate-to-severe depression.
Several classes of antidepressants are available:
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
tricyclic antidepressants
atypical antidepressants
selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Each class acts on a different neurotransmitter or combination of neurotransmitters.
A person should only take these medications as their doctor prescribes. Some drugs can take a while to have an impact. By stopping the drug, a person may not experience the benefits that it could offer.
Some people stop taking medication after symptoms improve, but this can lead to a relapse.
Raise any concerns about antidepressants with a doctor, including any intention to stop taking the medication.
Medication side effects
SSRIs and SNRIs can have side effects. A person may experience:
nausea
constipation
diarrhea
low blood sugar
weight loss
a rash
sexual dysfunction
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) require manufacturers to add warnings to the packaging of antidepressant drugs.
The warnings should indicate that, among other risks, these medications may increase suicidal thoughts or actions in some children, teenagers, and young adults within the first few months of treatment.
Natural remedies
Some people use natural remedies, such as herbal medicines, to treat mild-to-moderate depression.
However, since the FDA do not monitor herbal remedies, manufacturers may not be truthful about the quality of these products. They may not be safe or effective.
The following are some of the more popular herbs and plants that people use to treat depression:
St. John’s wort: This is not suitable for people who have or may have bipolar disorder.
Ginseng: Practitioners of traditional medicine may use this to improve mental clarity and reduce stress.
Chamomile: This contains flavonoids that may have an antidepressant effect.
Lavender: This may help reduce anxiety and insomnia.
It is essential to speak to a doctor before using any type of herbal remedy or supplement to treat depression. Some herbs can interfere with the action of drugs or otherwise make symptoms worse.
Supplements
A person may take the herbs above as supplements to treat symptoms of mild-to-moderate depression. Other types of supplements may also help treat these symptoms.
It is important to remember that the FDA do not monitor supplements to ensure that they are effective or safe.
Nonherbal supplements that may help treat depression include:
S-adenosyl methionine (SAMe): This is a synthetic form of a natural chemical in the body.
5-hydroxytryptophan: This may help boost serotonin, the neurotransmitter in the brain that affects a person’s mood.
Some research has suggested that SAMe may be as helpful as the prescription antidepressants imipramine and escitalopram, but more investigation is necessary.
Food and diet
Eating a lot of sugary or processed foods can lead to various physical health problems. Results of a 2019 study suggest that a diet that includes many of these types of food could affect the mental health of young adults.
The study also found that eating more of the following foods helped reduce depression symptoms:
fruit
vegetables
fish
olive oil
Psychotherapy
Psychological, or talking, therapies for depression include CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, and problem-solving treatment, among others.
For some forms of depression, psychotherapy is usually the first-line treatment, while some people respond better to a combination of psychotherapy and medications.
CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy are the two main types of psychotherapy for depression. A person may have CBT in individual sessions with a therapist, in groups, over the telephone, or online.
Interpersonal therapy aims to help people identify:
emotional problems that affect relationships and communication
how these issues also affect their mood
how all of this may be changed
Exercise
Aerobic exercise raises endorphin levels and stimulates the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, which is linked with mood. This may help relieve mild depression.
Brain stimulation therapies
Brain stimulation therapies are another treatment option. For example, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation sends magnetic pulses to the brain, and this may help treat major depression.
If depression does not respond to drug treatment, the person may benefit from electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT. This may be effective if psychosis occurs with depression.
