Signs and symptoms
The symptoms of depression can include:
a depressed mood
reduced interest or pleasure in activities once enjoyed
a loss of sexual desire
changes in appetite
unintentional weight loss or gain
sleeping too much or too little
agitation, restlessness, and pacing up and down
slowed movement and speech
fatigue or loss of energy
feelings of worthlessness or guilt
difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions
recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, or an attempt at suicide
In females
Depression is nearly twice as common among women as men, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Below are some symptoms of depression that tend to appear more often in females:
irritability
anxiety
mood swings
fatigue
ruminating (dwelling on negative thoughts)
Also, some types of depression are unique to females, such as:
postpartum depression
premenstrual dysphoric disorder
In males
Around 9% of men in the United States have feelings of depression or anxiety, according to the American Psychological Association.
Males with depression are more likely than females to drink alcohol in excess, display anger, and engage in risk-taking as a result of the disorder.
Other symptoms of depression in males may include:
avoiding families and social situations
working without a break
having difficulty keeping up with work and family responsibilities
displaying abusive or controlling behavior in relationships
In college students
Time at college can stressful, and a person may be dealing with other lifestyles, cultures, and experiences for the first time.
Some students have difficulty coping with these changes, and they may develop depression, anxiety, or both as a result.
Symptoms of depression in college students may include:
difficulty concentrating on schoolwork
insomnia
sleeping too much
a decrease or increase in appetite
avoiding social situations and activities that they used to enjoy
In teens
Physical changes, peer pressure, and other factors can contribute to depression in teenagers.
They may experience some of the following symptoms:
withdrawing from friends and family
difficulty concentrating on schoolwork
feeling guilty, helpless, or worthless
restlessness, such as an inability to sit still
In children
The CDC estimate that, in the U.S., 3.2%of children and teens aged 3–17 have a diagnosis of depression.
In children, symptoms can make schoolwork and social activities challenging. They may experience symptoms such as:
crying
low energy
clinginess
defiant behavior
vocal outbursts
Younger children may have difficulty expressing how they feel in words. This can make it harder for them to explain their feelings of sadness.
Causes
The medical community does not fully understand the causes of depression. There are many possible causes, and sometimes, various factors combine to trigger symptoms.
Factors that are likely to play a role include:
genetic features
changes in the brain’s neurotransmitter levels
environmental factors
psychological and social factors
additional conditions, such as bipolar disorder
