Causes
Emotional eating has many root causes.
Difficulty distinguishing between physical and emotional hunger
Growing up, you probably leaned on external cues to let you know you were done eating. “For example, if I’m eating a plate of food, one of the external cues is when my plate is finished, I’m done,” says Dr. Albers. “Or if a parent says to me, ‘You need to finish your plate,’ then you’re done, instead of those internal cues of paying attention to the stop and start that our body gives us.” With emotional eating, you often have trouble telling the difference between these internal cues — which signify physical hunger, or the signs your body send to let you know it’s time for nourishment — and emotional hunger.
Dieting
Dieting often leads to emotional eating, because trying to cut back on unhealthy things often means you’re limiting how much you eat and are eliminating certain foods. “Restrictive eating is one of the biggest triggers of emotional eating,” says Dr. Albers.
Anxiety
Anxiety is another “significant trigger” for emotional eating, she adds. But while many people eat more when they’re feeling anxious, others go in the opposite direction. “They don’t eat because they lose their appetite,” says Dr. Albers. “Their emotions are so great and so intense that it pushes away or supersedes that feeling of hunger, and they no longer tune into it. This can be problematic because we need food to help us to deal with stress and emotions.”
Situational stresses
Emotional eating can also arise from situational stresses. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted routines and led to isolation and boredom, creating an ideal environment for emotional eating. “We do a lot of boredom eating because eating feels purposeful,” says Dr. Albers. “It fills up our time, it gives us some entertainment. During the pandemic, a lot of anxiety, stress and boredom eating happened.”
Seasonal stressors
Seasonal stressors like colder temperatures and earlier sunsets, as well as the holidays, can also lead to episodes of emotional eating. “Holidays can bring up a lot of busyness, stress, contact with family members, and availability of all kinds of great holiday treats,” says Dr. Albers. “Sometimes it’s the perfect storm for emotional eating.”
