Treatment
There are many strategies to stop emotional eating. And while there’s no one-size-fits-all approach, good rules to follow include:
Change your diet to be healthier. Vitamin D-rich foods can improve your mood, so stock up on fortified milk and cereals, eggs, mushrooms, and fish like salmon.
Eat mandarin oranges. Not only are mandarin oranges portable, and easy to peel and eat, but they’re rich in vitamin C, which can help boost your immunity. Plus, citrus smells so good, it’s a stress reliever.
Be mindful about what you’re eating. Be mindful of the kind of snacks you are buying. Certain foods are more likely to trigger emotional eating. Know exactly which snacks you tend to reach for when feeling stressed.
Don’t let yourself get too hungry. You’ve probably heard the term “hangry” a portmanteau of “hungry” and “angry” used to describe someone who gets irritable when they’re past time to eat. Making sure you stave off this mood — for example, eating proteins can help you stay full for longer — is a good bet.
Where to turn to for help
If you’re dealing with emotional eating, it’s best to see a physician or a therapist and have an assessment to determine if you have an underlying medical issue or something else going on. For example, chronic pain can turn to emotional eating as a way to feel better, while depression can cause appetite changes.
“One of the things that we really talk about when someone comes in is, ‘Is this the primary issue, or is there another issue that’s making your emotional eating worse?’” says Dr. Albers. “So if you’re feeling depressed, is it the depression that needs to be treated to help the emotional eating? Or is it the other way around: Is emotional eating causing or exacerbating the depression? It’s a chicken and egg approach sometimes.”
However, you also have the power to change your eating habits, by just slowing down and being mindful.
“Before you take a bite, tune into yourself and ask yourself just that question, ‘Am I eating because I’m physically hungry, or because I’m emotionally feeling something?’” says Dr. Albers. “You would be surprised that when you pause and take that mindful moment, how often you discover, ‘You know what? Maybe I’m feeling bored right now’ or ‘Maybe I’m really not that hungry. I’m feeling anxious.’” Having that awareness can really shift your coping in a very different direction.”
