Mental Health
Introduction
Mental Health refers to cognitive, behavioral as well as emotional well - being. It is about how people think, feel and behave. This term is often used to indicate the absence of a mental disorder.
Mental Health can affect our day to day life, relationships as well as physical health.
Nevertheless, this connection works both ways. For various factors in people's lives, interpersonal relations as well as physical factors might contribute to mental health disruptions.
Nurturing one's mental health can preserve their ability to enjoy life. Yet this process is not easy, not only does it involve researching a balance between life activities and responsibilities, but also requires efforts to achieve psychological resilience.
Aspects such as stress, depression, and anxiety can all affect mental health and disrupt a person’s routine.
Although mental health is in commonly used to describe a mental state, doctors have found that many recognized psychological conditions are linked to physical roots.
“Mental health is a state of well-being in which an individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively, and is able to make a contribution to his or her community.”
(World Health Organization; WHO)
The World Health Organization empathize that mental health is "more than just the absence of mental disorders or disabilities". Summit mental health is not about avoiding active conditions, for it is to look after ongoing wellness and happiness.
They also stress that preserving and restoring mental health is crucial on an individual basis, as well as throughout different communities and societies around the world.
Risk factors for mental health conditions
Each and everyone of us has some risk of developing a mental health disorder, although their age, gender, religion or ethnicity.
In the U.S. and much of the developed world, mental disorders are one of the leading causes of disability.
As we mentioned before, social & financial circumstances, biological factors, and lifestyle choices can all shape a person’s mental health.
A large proportion of people with a mental health disorder have more than one condition at a time.
It is important to note that good mental health depends on a delicate balance of factors and that several elements of life and the world at large can work together to contribute to disorders.
Common mental health disorders
The most common types of mental illness are:
Mood disorders.
Anxiety disorders.
Schizophrenia disorders.
Mood disorders
Mood disorders may be referred to as affective disorders or depressive disorders.
People with mood disorders have severe changes in mood, which generally involve wither mania -which is a period of high energy and elation-, or depression. Mood disorders include;
Major depression: An individual with major depression experiences a constant low mood and loses interest in activities and events that they previously enjoyed. They can feel prolonged periods of sadness or extreme sadness.
Bipolar disorder: A person with bipolar disorder experiences unusual changes in their mood, energy levels, levels of activity, and ability to continue with daily life. Periods of high mood are known as manic phases, while depressive phases bring on low mood.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD): Reduced daylight triggers during the fall, winter, and early spring months trigger this type of major depression. It is most common in countries far from the equator.
Schizophrenia disorders
Mental health authorities are still trying to determine whether schizophrenia is a single disorder or a group of related illnesses. It is a highly complex condition.
Signs of schizophrenia typically develop between the ages of 16 and 30 years, according to the NIMH. The individual will have thoughts that appear fragmented, and they may also find it hard to process information.
Schizophrenia has negative and positive symptoms. Positive symptoms include delusions, thought disorders, and hallucinations. Negative symptoms include withdrawal, lack of motivation, and a flat or inappropriate mood.
Early signs of mental illness
There is no physical test or scan that reliably indicates whether a person has developed a mental illness. However, people should look out for the following as possible signs of a mental health disorder:
hearing voices.
being confused.
feeling hopeless.
experiencing delusions.
eating too much or too little.
displaying negative emotions.
sleeping too much or too little.
having consistently low energy.
withdrawing from friends, family, and colleagues.
avoiding activities that they would normally enjoy.
thinking of causing physical harm to themselves or others.
having persistent thoughts or memories that reappear regularly.
being unable to complete daily tasks, such as getting to work or cooking a meal.
using mood-altering substances, including alcohol and nicotine, more frequently.

